---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/stella-of-the-end-draft-3/"}
---

#stellaoftheend #script 
*Stella of the End* is a visual novel, the second one I'm covering on this channel. It follows the journey of Jude Gray and the android Philia as she attempts to achieve her goal: Humanity. While on the surface level this may appear to be a story based on the classic Pinocchio tropes, something stood out to me as I was playing through this one. The usual pillars are there. What it means to be human takes center stage, but there are other things that creep in. Themes like self-determinism, our relationship with technology, and how we want to view humans as a species.

Because humanity is dying, and only Philia can save them. She can't explain how or why, but she knows that it's something only she can do. Compassionate and hopeful, she refuses to harm anything, even when it means hurting herself. She looks to save those in trouble. She lacks experience, and is incapable of seeing danger even when it's right in front of her.

The world has long since been reclaimed by massive machine kaiju called Singularity Machines. Walking mountains, these monsters boast technology far beyond what humans had even in their prime. Why they attack or avoid humanity is a mystery. When they are encountered, disaster follows. Towns are wiped off the map. No one survives.

Fortunately, Philia doesn't travel alone. Jude is a Courier, one of the few humans willing to brave the areas outside of the human safe zones. Skilled with the technology of the past, he literally cloaks himself in the harsh lessons he's learned. A realist, his ideals leave little room for doubt. You follow the rules of the new world, or you die.

But there is some hope left. Willem Grosvenor, a mysterious client, contacted Jude when his aptitude for technology became apparent. Now, he promises an end to the end. Mysterious and in possession of resources beyond the imagination of anyone else, he's looking to find a way to reverse the damage done. He thinks Philia is the key to that. And he's willing to pay Jude a fortune to see this job done right.

I won't be going through this story beat by beat. As a true visual novel, it has no decisions for the player to make. It took me about 20 hours to read through it, but I'm also a slow reader. If any of this interests you, it's cheap, usually about $20 USD. It grabbed me immediately, and by the end I was thinking to myself that I wouldn't be surprised to see an anime adaptation at some point. The story seems made for it. Heavy character centered dialogues, questions of humanity and its meaning, and in-depth development of Philia as the story goes on. From beginning to end, Philia grows into a completely different person, because that's the whole point of the journey.

What fascinated me about this story is the way the two leads play off each other. Jude's realism is deeply cynical, but he's also not an ass about it. Rather than bulldozing through Philia's hopeful outlook, he tries to teach her, slowly, that compromises must be made. While he's seen a lot, some of that hopefulness still remains. His reasons for becoming a Courier in the first place lie in that hope.

Jude is a technophile. He loves any sort of technology he can get his hands on, and this is the theme that surprised me during my read through. The story can't help but question technology's role in humanity. Philia plays into that. As an Advanced Era android, she appears and acts human. Some differences stand out, and she hates them. For her, humanity is the true goal. While her differences remain, she can't be happy with herself. She's even willing to die in this form to be reincarnated in another. There's the question of if the technology was worth it. If all the advancements that make her possible make her miserable, why did we strive for them at all? 

Jude doesn't get this. For him, technology from the before-fore is the point of his existence. He dives into ruins for money, but also to discover the past. There are plenty of times when he shows his ability to interact with those systems. If placed in a functioning Advanced Era city, he has more of an advantage than anyone else. He's been born in the wrong time.

At first, we don't know why the Singularity Machines exist. They appeared mysteriously, and most of them cloak themselves perpetually. Only their massive size gives them away as they plod around the surface. As we get closer to the end, it's revealed that they are the incarnations of humanity's last and greatest invention: the AI networks. Miraculous codes that even now continue to evolve, they were once the guardians of humans. Now, they seem to be its menace.

Philia's development continues to accelerate. Her journey with Jude teaches her many of his values. She continues to question the world, and her place in it. She starts to question why Jude is helping her, and if it's worth the journey. What does he gain out of this? Where once she was content to trust him, he teaches her to ask bigger questions. These are the questions we must always ask ourselves, and they're the questions Philia is saddled with as she learns.

These are the questions Jude has always wrestled with. His past isn't complicated, but it's fraught with his decisions. He became a Courier because he was good at it. His aptitude came at a price, one which his luddite village forced him to choose between. Either he lives with his newly formed family, or he gains freedom and technology. He chose freedom, and in doing so left behind his privileges as a father. Eventually he returned, only to find those decisions can't be revoked. This was the cost Jude paid for his freedom: two gravestones. One of his wife, and the other of a child he never knew.

As they travel together, Philia begins to yearn for parentage. She reaches out to Jude, seeing him as a possible father figure. He shoves her away with a passion that shocks him. To him, Philia is supposed to be cargo. He's not supposed to get attached to her. He's not allowed to let himself hope. He knows she's an android, that she's not human. Her thoughts are simulated, her emotions a façade, her soul artificial. But she gets to him all the same. His extended conversations with her force him to admit that she's more human than he's comfortable with. He starts to see her as a daughter, no matter how much he tries to stop himself.

When Jude found Philia, she was obviously an android. Printed in a machine, she was released into the world with barely any personality. In minutes, she'd chosen a name. Within half an hour she already started to act less robotic. In a day she was indistinguishable from a human girl. Philia's moments of uncanny valley disappeared fast. Its harder and harder to see her as something inhuman. Harder to see her as just cargo. Jude knows this, and his inner monologue acknowledges it. If not for his own experience with technology, he might not have even noticed it. Against his better judgement, Philia's growing humanity is influencing him.

It scares the shit out of him. Jude is well informed. He knows what androids are like. He knows they can't truly be humans. But Philia challenges those beliefs. By the midpoint, she's completely indistinguishable from a human. She develops flaws and finds ways to annoy him. She breaks down when she's pushed under stress. She runs off just like a real kid would. She gets into trouble because it seemed like the right thing to do. She even finds ways to go against her instincts. She develops so far so fast that she becomes dangerous -- if she wanted to be.

Philia doesn't believe in violence. One of her first introductions to human society is seeing town guards shoot a feral human through the leg. She developed a strong aversion to guns, one that's only overcome when she has to make a decision between leaving someone to die and taking a gun for self protection. She overcomes those barriers, and with it develops further. The wheel turned and she stopped being who she was before.

As they get closer to Willem, the two come across more information about him. He has a staggering amount of knowledge on humanity. He's been doing this a long time -- at least several hundred years. Jude is only the most recent Courier he's employed, though he might be the last if this journey goes well. He's simultaneously forthcoming and restrained. He's gracious, but has trouble seeing Philia's humanity until Jude directly forces it on him. There's something colder beneath the surface. We start to think about his humanity -- and Jude's. Jude isn't the only one to question it either. Philia begins to wonder about the point of all of this too.

The personal conflicts in this story are as real as they come. When Jude and Philia finally reach Willem, Philia no longer trusts the destination. Understanding has dawned on her that Jude only considered her a job from the start. He only stuck with her because he was being paid -- an idea he's intentionally nurtured in her view. Realizing the time for goodbyes is nearing, Jude tries his best to make that less painful. He's always pushed her to grow on her own, regardless of what he said. Her burgeoning humanity has become a burdening humanity, and now she doesn't want to take that final step. In front of her is a path to becoming human. Willem promises her a way to reincarnate and rid herself of her AI body. But would that really help her achieve humanity? If Jude only did this for the money... how can she trust that Willem doesn't have his own motives? How can she trust *her* own motives?

Philia's life was built on three pillars. She wanted to become human. She wanted to become a Courier, just like Jude. And she wanted a parent. In this moment, all three pillars are crumbling. In choosing his job over her, Jude showed Philia the harsh realities that being a Courier comes with. In rejecting her so soundly, he leaves her at a loss. And in both of these, he shows her the cost of becoming human. She understands the cruelty of that path, and it breaks her. Can't be human, can't be a Courier, can't be a daughter. All of her dreams die at once, leaving her with nothing else.

Jude understands some of this. His attachment to Philia has grown the point where he's strongly against giving her up to Willem. He knows once he does, he will regret it, even if he can't say why. He knows from experience that you can't revoke a decision. But he also knows he doesn't have the right to make that decision anymore. He already made it once, and it resulted in his family's death. He can't do that for Philia. He can't take that responsibility. If he decided to accept Philia as his daughter, he would admit that he made the wrong choice. He would admit that she was human. He would sacrifice the ideals that sent him here to begin with. He would break the boundary between humanity and technology.

But he's already been making sacrifices for Philia. Bit by bit, she's chipped away at his resistance. He's taken bullets for her. He's killed for her. She's become more than just cargo. Even if her emotions are simulated, his no longer are. While he has trouble accepting it, she is his daughter. He taught her everything he could, and now she's at the apex of that growth. So he forces her to make the choice he couldn't. When she asks him to kill her, he takes that bluff.

And the gun goes to her head. But the bullets that are fired don't leave physical wounds.

-- Jude's rant goes here -- 

With that, Philia's development takes one final step. She understands, in that moment, what despair feels like. And she makes her own choice.

She wants to live. Her emotions surge back, filling the gap Jude's betrayal left. In that moment, she graduates and a new identity is formed. She understands why Jude thinks the way he does. Suddenly, she becomes her own person, wholly and completely. No longer reliant on Jude to continue. The wheel turns, and she's no longer the person she was before.

Philia's decision is couched in one of my favorite styles of writing. Her emotions aren't explained in the way I just have, but they are still very visible. It requires us to learn how to process them as she does. It trusts us as readers to have that emotional intelligence to understand how she's changed and empathize with that change. When she pulls her own gun on Jude, we agree with her. He hit her at her weakest point. There must be a cost, and he taught her how to exact it. 

But there must also be compromises, and a consideration for when the cost is too high. That question of value always returns, and it's one that I think deserves consideration. Advancement isn't free. It's a turning wheel that forces us into a different place than we were before. There is a cost. We have to leave something behind. For some of us, that's our values. For others, it's our comfort. What do we gain? How is the cost paid? Can we recover it? These are the questions we must always ask ourselves, and they're the questions Philia is saddled with as she learns.

Philia's humanity is the goal of her existence, but even she doesn't know what that actually means. Humanity is tricky to define. Is it just having a human body? Is it seeing humanity in others? Is it acting with compassion? Is it fighting for survival? What defines humanity in oneself? Is it seeing yourself as human, or is it acting with humanity? What makes Jude human but not Philia? These are all questions the story raises but leaves unanswered. More and more, we start to wonder why Philia was created. It's only when we finally meet Willem in person that we gain an answer.

Imagine for a moment, that we were looking for god. We didn't know what god looked like, but we were sure they were great and powerful. After all, we were great and powerful, so if followed that they had to be. We searched throughout the land, but we couldn't find a trace of them. As we progressed, we found clues to their existence. Proof that at some point, we must have had contact with them. But all signs always say the same thing. They were here, then they weren't.

Imagine then, that we domesticated chickens. Not hard, it's not even fictional. These chickens weren't treated particularly well, since they were used only as a food source. They grew up, were slaughtered, eaten, and then everything else was disposed of. At some point, research into our god problem pointed to something unthinkable. The very same chickens we now ate in mass were the remnants of our creators. We had been eating our origin. What would it mean? Would we try to deny it? Would we look for another alternative? Would we break down? Or would we try to make contact and restore our "god" to where it once was? This is the root of *Stella of the End*'s story.

There's a lead I've buried here. This is a post apocalyptic scenario, and the massive Singularity Machines give us an idea of where that apocalypse came from. Those questions about humans? The AI that controlled the machines answered it for themselves a long, long time ago. The thing is, it has been centuries since humans created the AI. During that time the AI continued to develop, eventually surpassing human understanding. They worked together to protect humanity at first. Then, from their perspective, for reasons the AI couldn't understand, humanity disappeared.

But they're clearly still here. Bustling towns still flourish, people still practice trades. Humans fight each other for scarce resources, steal from each other. The humanity we know and love, with all its gems and flaws is undeniably still present. So what changed? Our genes did. The humanity that inhabits the planet now is genetically distinct from the humanity that created the AIs. The definition the AI came up with is proven wrong. Humanity is not a species. So what are they? They need a new definition, one defined by interaction, not math. They need something that even we, as humans, have trouble defining. They're trying to understand what humans are, to find their creators. That's why Philia exists. To answer the age old question: what is love?

Philia's name is not an accident. It was the first thing she chose for herself, and its relationship to love is obvious. During her conversations with Jude, the idea of instinctual love versus true love comes up. From Jude's perspective, parental love, instinctual love, is coded into a person at a genetic level. It's not real. But Jude has loved before, he's felt the difference, or so he says. Philia, by contrast, loves humanity because she was programmed to. She can't overcome that, just as a parent can't choose to not love their child. It's this distinction that the game blurs over its runtime. Jude eventually does accept Philia as a daughter. He learns that parental love is not entirely driven by your genetics. He makes a choice based off of that. 

Before he finally makes it to Willem, Jude is grievously wounded. Willem saves him and patches him up, but in doing so implants nanites into the Courier as a precaution. If something were to happen to Willem, the mysterious client who neither traveler trusts, it will reflect on Jude himself. Willem's finally reveals the cost that both of them knew was coming. Philia was never intended to become human. Her only purpose was to act as an index of humanity. By sacrificing everything she'd learned, she would be entombed forever and teach the AI what humanity really looked like. It would allow the AI to once again see the creators they had lost so long ago. All it would cost was Jude's daughter. Philia doesn't object, because she loves all of humanity -- and because it would save Jude.

When he's given the choice to give Philia up to Willem, Jude doesn't hesitate. Willem dies, and Jude nearly dies along with him. If he weren't on board the most technologically advanced space station ever created, he wouldn't have had a chance. Instead, he's given months left to live. It's a price he gladly accepts.

Jude's reasoning is fascinating. In the end, he found humanity in her, and chose to let it thrive, rather than giving it up. He recognized that to save humanity, he would have to trample on everything Philia had found. He couldn't do that, not again. He recognized her decision, but overruled it as a parent. He wanted to leave a better world for her, and to hell with the rest of the planet.

And so this story ends. Philia and Jude share several final months together, knowing the end approaches. Rather than fear it though, Jude calmly approaches it. In the last few hours of his life, he embraces Philia as his daughter, giving her his name and allowing her to carry on in the world once he's gone.

Stella of the End is about humanity, but it's also about what we make. What do we leave behind when we change? What legacy can we show to the world after we're gone? Did we live up to our own standards, or did we let them slide, changing ourselves in the process? Jude chose to change because he wanted to remain human. Technology was his calling, but recognizing the humanity in it was what forced him to act. Philia is a representation of all of the main themes of this story. She's the apex of humanity's technological innovation. She's proof that love is real. She shows us that we can decide our own fates, regardless of our pre-programmed instincts. And finally, she's a sign that humanity does not die -- its form simply changes. When our bodies inevitably die, we can only hope that what we leave behind for our creations -- our children -- is love and hope for the future. That's the choice that Jude made. It's the choice I hope we all have at the end. 

-- Even if humanity dies, the machines we have created will inherit our love and create the future --