---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/stella-of-the-end-draft-1/"}
---

#script #stellaoftheend
There's a lot of talk about AI lately. We see jobs declining, utilities skyrocketing, rampant slopification of our entertainment. No matter where we go, it seems to follow, and never for the better. The warnings we used to give in science fiction have gone unheeded, and we're seeing those realities come to life. This isn't going to be a video about that though. This is a video about what comes after.

*Stella of the End* is a visual novel. It follows the journey of Jude Gray and the android Philia as she attempts to achieve her goal: Humanity. While on the surface level this may appear to be a story based on the classic Pinocchio tropes, something stood out to me as I was playing through this one. The usual pillars are there. What it means to be human takes center stage, but there are other things that creep in. Themes like self-determinism, our relationship with technology, and how we want to view humans as a species.

Because humanity is dying, and only Philia may be able to save them. She can't explain how or why, but she knows that it's something only she can do. Compassionate and hopeful, she refuses to harm anything. She looks to save those in trouble. She lacks experience, and is incapable of seeing danger even when it's right in front of her.

The world has long since been reclaimed by massive machine kaiju called Singularity Machines. Walking mountains, these monsters boast technology far beyond what humans had even in their prime. Why they attack or avoid humanity is a mystery. When they are encountered, disaster follows. Towns are wiped off the map. No one survives.

Fortunately, Philia doesn't travel alone. Jude is a Courier, one of the few humans willing to brave the areas outside of the human safe zones. Skilled with the technology of the past, he literally cloaks himself in the harsh lessons he's learned. A realist, is ideals leave little room for doubt. You follow the rules of the new world, or you die.

But there is some hope left. Willem Grosvenor, a mysterious client, contacted Jude when his aptitude for technology became apparent. Now, he promises an end to the end. Mysterious and in possession of resources beyond the imagination of anyone else, he's looking to find a way to reverse the damage done. He thinks Philia is the key to that.

I won't be going through this story beat by beat. As a true visual novel, it has no decisions for the player to make. It took me about 20 hours to read through it, but I'm also a slow reader. If any of this interests you, it's cheap, usually about $20 USD. It grabbed me immediately, and by the end I was thinking to myself that I wouldn't be surprised to see an anime adaptation at some point. The story seems made for it. Heavy character centered dialogues, questions of humanity and its meaning, and in-depth development of Philia as the story goes on. From beginning to end, Philia grows into a completely different person, because that's the whole point of the journey.

What fascinated me about this story is the way the two leads play off each other. Jude's realism is deeply cynical, but he's also not an ass about it. Rather than bulldozing through Philia's hopeful outlook, he tries to teach her, slowly, that compromises must be made. While he's seen a lot, some of that hopefulness still remains. His reasons for becoming a Courier in the first place lie in that hope.

Jude is a technophile. He loves any sort of technology he can get his hands on, and this is the theme that surprised me during my read through. The story can't help but question technology's role in humanity. Philia plays into that. As an Advanced Era android, she appears and acts human. Some differences stand out, and she hates them. For her, humanity is the true goal. While her differences remain, she can't be happy with herself. She's even willing to die in this form to be reincarnated in another. There's the question of if the technology was worth it. If all the advancements that make her possible make her miserable, why did we strive for them at all? 

Jude doesn't get this. For him, technology from the before-fore is the point of his existence. He dives into ruins for money, but also to discover the past. There are plenty of times when he shows his ability to interact with those systems. If placed in a functioning Advanced Era city, he has more of an advantage than anyone else. He's been born in the wrong time.

At first, we don't know why the Singularity Machines exist. They appeared mysteriously, and most of them cloak themselves perpetually. Only their massive size gives them away as they plod around the surface. As we get closer to the end, it's revealed that they are the incarnations of humanity's last and greatest invention: the AI networks. Miraculous codes that even now continue to evolve, they were once the guardians of humans. Now, they seem to be its menace.

Philia's development continues to accelerate. Her journey with Jude teaches her many of his values. She continues to question the world, and her place in it. She starts to question why Jude is helping her, and if it's worth the journey. That question of value always returns, and it's one that I think deserves consideration. Advancement isn't free. It's a turning wheel that forces us into a different place than we were before. There is a cost. We have to leave something behind. For some of us, that's our values. For others, it's our comfort. What do we gain? How is the cost paid? Can we recover it? These are the questions we much always ask ourselves, and they're the questions Philia is saddled with as she learns.

These are the questions Jude has always wrestled with. His past isn't complicated, but it's fraught with his decisions. He became a Courier because he was good at it. He left behind his lover and their child. He left behind his privileges as a father. He returned, only to find those decisions can't be revoked.

As they travel together, Philia begins to yearn for parentage. She reaches out to Jude, seeing him as a possible father figure. He pushes her away with a passion that shocks him. To him, Philia is supposed to be cargo. He's not supposed to get attached to her. He's not allowed to let himself hope. He knows she's an android, that she's not human. Her thoughts are simulated, her emotions a façade, her soul artificial. But she gets to him all the same. His extended conversations with her force him to admit that she's more human than he'd like to admit. He starts to see her as a daughter, no matter how much he tries to stop himself.

As the current AI bubble inflates, we see more and more people falling into AI psychosis. There are those who want to trust the AI chatbots they interact with. They treat them kindly, tell them secrets in confidence. They believe that behind those vibe-coded brains is something that understands them. Then there are those who are repulsed by the AI. They rightfully understand that what we have today is nothing but a fancy auto-complete. An auto-complete with an overwhelming amount of data, but still one that can't think for itself. For those people, the AI chatbots lie deep within the Uncanny Valley. That's where Jude started, but he's slowly, very slowly, climbing out of it. Against his better judgement, Philia's growing humanity is influencing him and he knows it.

It scares the shit out of him. Jude is well informed. He knows what androids are like. He knows they can't truly be humans. But Philia challenges those beliefs. By the midpoint, she's almost indistinguishable from a human. She develops flaws and finds ways to annoy him. She breaks down when she's pushed under stress. She even finds ways to go against her instincts. She develops so far so fast that she becomes dangerous -- if she wanted to be.

Philia doesn't believe in violence. One of her first introductions to human society is seeing town guards shoot a feral human through the leg. She develops a strong aversion to them, one that's only overcome when she has to make a decision between leaving someone to die and taking a gun for self protection. She overcomes those barriers, and with it develops further.

The personal conflicts in this story are as real as they come. When Jude and Philia finally reach Willem, Philia is in sad shape. Understanding has dawned on her that Jude only considered her a job from the start. It's something he's done little to dissuade her of. He's always pushed her to grow on her own, regardless of what he said. So she has. Jude's role as her parent figure has shattered for her. She's alone and insignificant. Not a human. Just a fancy piece of technology to be bandied about for the sake of someone else. Where she once wanted to follow in Jude's footsteps as a Courier, she now leaves that dream behind as well. She understands the cruelty of that path, and it breaks her. Can't be human, can't be a Courier, can't have a parent. All of her dreams die at once, leaving her with nothing else.

Jude understands some of this. His attachment to Philia has grown the point where he's strongly against giving her up to Willem. He knows once he does, he will regret it. He knows from experience that you can't revoke a decision. But he also knows he doesn't have the right to make that decision anymore. He already made it once, and it resulted in his family's eventual death. He can't do that for Philia. He can't take that responsibility. If he decided to accept Philia as his daughter, he would admit that he made the wrong choice. He would admit that she was human. He would sacrifice the ideals that sent him here to begin with.

But he's already been making sacrifices for Philia. Bit by bit, she's chipped away at his resistance. He's taken bullets for her. He's killed for her. She's become more than just cargo. Even if her emotions are simulated, his no longer are. While he has trouble accepting it, she is his daughter. He taught her everything he could, and now she's at the apex of that growth. So he forces her to make the choice he couldn't. When she asks him to kill her, he takes that bluff.

And the gun goes to her head. But the bullets that are fired don't leave physical wounds.

-- Jude's rant goes here -- 

With that, Philia's development takes one final step. She understands, in that moment, what despair feels like. And she makes her own choice.

She wants to live. Her emotions surge back, filling the gap Jude's betrayal left. In that moment, she graduates. She understands why Jude thinks the way he does. Suddenly, she becomes her own person, wholly and completely. No longer reliant on Jude to continue.

Philia's decision is couched in one of my favorite styles of writing. Her emotions aren't explained in the way I just have, but they are still very visible. It requires us to learn how to process them as she does. It trusts us as readers to have that emotional intelligence to understand how she's changed and empathize with that change. I love this. It's such a great moment for this story, but it's not the final one.

Philia's humanity is the goal of her existence, but even she doesn't know what that actually means. Humanity is tricky to define. Is it just having a human body? Is it seeing humanity in others? Is it acting with compassion? Is it fighting for survival? What defines humanity in oneself? Is it seeing yourself as human, or is it acting with humanity? What makes Jude human but not Philia? These are all questions the story raises but leaves unanswered. More and more, we start to wonder why Philia was created. It's only when we finally meet Willem in person that we gain an answer.

There's a lead I've buried here. This is a post apocalyptic scenario, and the massive Singularity Machines give us an idea of where that apocalypse came from. Those questions about humans? The AI that controlled the machines answered it for themselves a long, long time ago. The thing is, it has been centuries since humans created the AI. During that time the AI continued to develop, eventually surpassing human understanding. They worked together to protect humanity at first. Then, from their perspective, for reasons the AI couldn't understand, humanity disappeared.

But they're clearly still here. So what changed? Our genes did. The humanity that inhabits the planet now is genetically distinct from the humanity that created the AIs. They need a new definition, one defined by interaction, not math. They need something that even we, as humans, have trouble defining. They're trying to understand what humans are, to find their creators. That's why Philia exists. To answer the age old question: what is love?

Philia's name is not an accident. It was the first thing she chose for herself, and its relationship to love is obvious. During her conversations with Jude, the idea of instinctual love versus true love comes up. From Jude's perspective, parental love, instinctual love, is coded into a person. It's not real. But Jude has loved before, he's felt the difference, or so he says. Philia, by contrast, loves humanity because she was programmed to. She can't overcome that, just as a parent can't choose to not love their child. It's this distinction that the game blurs over its runtime. Jude eventually does accept Philia as a daughter. He learns that parental love is not entirely driven by your genetics. He makes a choice based off of that. When he's given the choice to give Philia up to Willem on pain of death, he chooses to die for her, because that's how deep his love for her is. In the end, he found humanity in her, and chose to let it thrive, rather than giving it up.

That's where I'll leave this. This story isn't perfect. I feel like Jude's relationship to his career choice isn't strong enough, and we see so little of humanity considering how important they are. But the core that I found in this one is a gem. I've tried to be sparse on the details, for those who still want to read through this. I think it is worth your time, especially given how short it is. It made me consider others differently. It made me think about where the humanity I see in them comes from. What are my definitions? How can I improve on them? How can I treat others better? Am I making the same mistakes that Jude was early on? Do I really see humanity in others, or am I deluding myself?